# Homework 1
STAT 757 -- Section 1001<br>
Instructor: Colin Grudzien

## Due: 09/05/2019


## Instructions:

<blockquote>
You may work with others on these problems but you must turn in your own work.  In this assignment, you must turn in an R notebook for credit -- learning to use this tool is part of the assignment.  In future homeworks, you will have the option for other formats.  For credit, you must: 

* include all figures and your scripts which generated the figures in the R Notebook.  
* include a title in your R Notebook, as well as your name, the date, and an explation of your work in plain text, with the R code commented.
* hand in a printed copy of your work at the beginning of class.
</blockquote>

## Problem 1:

 1. Complete the [Intro to Basics free lesson on R programming from DataCamp](https://www.datacamp.com/courses/free-introduction-to-r).
 
 2. Include the certificate of completion generated by the website as a figure in the R Notebook with a caption.  

## Problem 2:

* Read through the Software Carpentry lesson [Creating Publication-Quality Graphics with ggplot2](https://swcarpentry.github.io/r-novice-gapminder/08-plot-ggplot2/index.html).  Then complete the following:

  1. Import the ``gampminder`` data from the library ``gapminder``. 

  2. We want to do some regional analysis.  Write an R script that performs the following:
<div class="pagebreak"> </div>

	 * make a multi-panel plot, where each frame corresponds to one of the five regions: ``Africa``, ``Americas``, ``Asia``, ``Europe``, ``Oceania``;  
	 * the vertical axis should correspond to ``lifeExp`` and the horizontal axis should correspond to ``year``;

	 * data points should be represented by dots, color coded by region with a color-key in the figure;
	 
	 * include a trend-line using a linear model for each region along with the data points;
	 
	 * the figure should include the following labels: 
	 
	    * ``x-axis = Year``; 
	    * ``y-axis = Life expectancy``;  
	    * ``Figure title = Regional life expectancy trends``; 
	    * ``color-key title = Region``.  

* Hint: You can produce this with a combination of the functions used in the Software Carpentry lesson Creating Publication-Quality Graphics with ggplot2.

